you know you get up here often or even
Washington most every so often yes and
you guys known each other for 20 odd
years oh yeah a little over 2 21 22
years so we'll get a couple of really
interesting institutions to talk about
you know with them and end the media
analysis boy if ever there's something
is really relevant it's that the to tie
together
welcome welcome very much conversations
where I'm pleased to welcome to the
program two gentlemen who are concerned
with the media and also with the
accurate reporting within the media that
might be improved upon from many
people's perspective and if I may I'd
like to introduce on the far left miss
Lewis wolf who is generally in
Washington but is here in New York and
we're very happy to welcome him to the
program he's one of the co publishers of
the encounters of the journal covert
action quarterly and Lewis will welcome
very very much too common savory meal
into Manhattan network thank you and on
my immediate left is a old friend if I
may say so bill or William shop who is
with the Institute for media analysis
and is also one of the cofounders of the
covert action quarterly and gentlemen
welcome very very much to conversation
Thank You Verrill glad to be here yeah I
wonder maybe you would bill maybe you
could share just from your own
background covert action quarterly has
won so many awards in terms of the
censorship awards that are given in
terms of covering stories that are not
followed by the normal or the
established press as it were or I wonder
maybe you could share your covert action
quarterly when it got started and then
let's tie it in and loop it in if we can
with the media for the Institute for
media analysis but Kim still in
historical background maybe of your two
association and the establishment of
this really important journal quote you
know a covert action for sure what I'd
be happy to early in fact this month is
our 20th anniversary of publishing
covert action it was originally called
covert action information bulletin and
later the name was changed to covert
action quarterly and we've been
publishing steadily for 20 years
generally focusing on undercover
operations exposing the intelligence
complex of the United States as it
relates to foreign policy and very often
and very importantly how it relates to
media misinformation and disinformation
primarily we Lou and I and our third
co-founder Ellen Ray met shortly before
we publicize een when Lou was working
with Philip AG on a oh yeah look that
ultimately came out called
I'm the Ronald dirty work no on the run
was Phil's own book yeah are you and
Phil and myself and a few others and
Ellen worked on on two books dirty work
the CIA in Western Europe and then dirty
work to the CIA in Africa I had done as
you know I had done a programmer field
of AG some time ago maybe you could
spell out a fill of AG was because he's
a really interesting he is indeed and
was a very brave person he was really
the first former employee of the CIA a
high-level a case officer of the
employee for 12 years or more who saw
the light as it were turned against the
agency after he left it and decided to
expose the inner workings of it and his
his first book inside the company in
seven 1976 I believe it came out was the
first time that any insider had detailed
on a day-by-day basis the activities of
a CIA station what goes on in a foreign
country through the the station of the
Central Intelligence Agency that's based
in that particular country we have them
the US government has them in every
country but before that it was a very
incredibly secretive operation very
little was known about it no former CIA
officers had ever done a tell-all sort
of a book and Phil absolutely she told
everything about everything and every
operation he'd have been involved in
every name of every person had ever been
involved it was quite a shock wave
around the world and book and it was all
over yes indeed and it was a very brave
thing particularly at that time for him
to take that kind of a thing well it
wasn't very mighty lea raid forces yeah
he ended up in fact there were many
people who thought that he might get
assassinated and it feels only
explanation that it didn't happen is
that if anything had happened to him the
whole world would have blamed the CIA
for it it would have been no I mean an
accident and nobody would have believed
it was an accident is there something to
be said for that we talk about
whistleblowers or people who actually do
take that position that very often the
best lombardi is to say it I think the
best defense is a
firm and well thought-out offense in
terms of some of these things that do
what is in my heart and you give a
little hard to people this is it
differently between a disgruntled
employer and the central intelligence
agent in fact and Phil Phil did not
escape unscathed the the the CIA really
vamped on him they threw their context
with the governments in Europe where he
was staying they caused him to be
deported from England they caused him to
be deported from the Netherlands they
caused him to be deported from Italy
from from five or six or seven countries
for a while he couldn't find any place
to to live ultimately he settled in
Germany and in Spain and his residency
has had residency in Germany for many
years but they made it very very
difficult for him difficult for his
family certainly difficult for him to do
anything of any significance in sort of
straight employment but was at that
point he was not any longer interested
in straight employment fit what Phil
said was that you and I don't think he
invented it I don't know who said it
first he just said if he keeps looking
over your shoulder you're going to trip
over your own feet you just have to you
just have to go forward and we did the
same thing we took Lou and I and Ellen
took a lot of heat when we first started
covert action magazine the CIA was not
very well known then covert operations
were not very well known then things
things have changed mightily in the last
20 years that I'm sure we'll talk about
yes in those days people didn't know
very much about it or didn't want to
question or do you think well a lot of
people thought it was horribly
unpatriotic to complain about the fact
that in our opinion the US government
was doing itself doing the horribly
unpatriotic things we were interfering
in the affairs of other countries all
around the world we were having foreign
leaders and both in power and opposition
leaders assassinated all around the
world we were doing pretty terrible
things and causing
untold suffering and millions upon
millions of deaths not not a handful but
but you know fomenting revolutions and
encounter revolutions in which hundreds
of thousands of millions of people would
get killed now and we thought the
patriotic thing to do was to object to
our government doing this in the
beginning there were a lot of people who
just thought it was unpatriotic to
criticize anything the government did
it's a bit different now again it's hard
to realize now what it was like 20 years
ago right or 20 years before that in the
time of McCarthy was umber certain since
I got worse but yet you know our bends
he had a yen day and you had you know
most of dec and all kinds of things that
were going on and it was not in your
your stuff is it now becoming that the
the the questioning of this or whistle
blowing in the sense of whistleblowing
upon the United States government
foreign policy initiatives and so forth
in that larger sense preps and accompany
all that some of these companies are
walking with pretty big league boots in
a world of the changes in the 20 years
so is it becoming a filament you're in
Washington in a certain sense Louis is
it becoming is it becoming any easier in
the sense that people are more ready to
listen to some of these stories that are
put in the in covert action quarterly or
how do you sense your audience as it
were and interest in the the story the
kind of stories you produce and I wonder
maybe you could talk a little bit about
the covert action quarter what kinds of
stories you tend to have there and how
is it you won so many Ward's from the
project censorship competition as it
were that's held each year well i would
say first of all that many Americans
have been given have been spoon-fed a
totally false history of our country and
of our both foreign and domestic history
policy and in in regard to the CIA it
has been sold to the American people as
an agency protecting the American people
protecting our country against foreign
aggressors and foreign enemies the
reality however is that the CIA has
engaged and continues to engage I want
to make clear in a whole range of
operations which we can discuss in some
detail which the human cost the human
factor here in human
cost of these operations is what causes
and creates more enemies for the United
States than then certainly than friends
and the legacy of the CIA around the
world and also at home because there is
what they call in the trade blowback and
so the operations that are conducted and
conceived out of Langley at the
headquarters in Virginia tend to blow
back and so a lot of blowback what
didn't be well backfire or that now they
they rebound in the United States and so
activities for example in the media
field yes a false story which is planted
in the London Sunday Times for capital
which happens often very frequently or
in mexico city or in in in pakistan
wherever it is because of the of the
electronic revolution and because people
are more and more aware as you point out
these these stories these false and
phony stories blowback and it's the same
with the activities after the gulf war
you remember that people came home the
veterans came home with the Gulf War
Syndrome this was not a CIA war this was
a this was an operation conducted
primarily by the Pentagon and yet the
CIA was was intimately involved in the
disinformation which and the public
relations which sold that war to the
Gulf operation desert storm before it
even happened he sold that to the
American people to accept it the
Congress our magazine i should say has
tried to document as to to really get
the story out in its full and complete
measure and not that we don't leave it
to to innuendo or to rumor or anything
like that we document what we wrote what
we report and we get the best writers we
can find both in the US and around the
world who are exposing these covert
operations and you bring up this idea of
disinformation and the need media
mediated manipulation of consciousness
which is so much a part of
governance are governing these days we
look at the campaigning for presidency
and it's a media campaign that is
launched and the media becomes more and
more important so there really is a
connection between covert action
quarterly and there now at the Institute
for immediate analysis the government
has always known of the importance of
the media I mean people don't realize
but from the very beginning a very very
substantial chunk of the intelligence
budget of the CIA budget was devoted to
media operations from from the very
beginning because that is as important
or more important than actual operations
on the ground in making people think
that the reason something happened are
something other than the real reasons
making people think that certain events
around the world mean other than they do
and most particularly making things
which in fact were generated by the US
appear to be indigenous I mean one of
the major aspects of a covert operation
is that the u.s. involvement is supposed
to be kept secret so the US has staged
wars and revolutions and coos and
overthrows all around the world making
it seem as if these were local internal
matters of that particular country when
in fact the thing could have been
created from the very very beginning
with us people and us money and us
support in US weapons and US uniforms
and everything else and you just you
hire the local people to kill each other
but you've done everything and there
wouldn't have been a civil war let's say
where it was unless you had not the US
intelligence community had not decided
to create a civil war yeah and there's
this is the worst part of it because
many of these covert operations are
become disputes that never would have
happened in the first place if the US
hadn't decided to do it and that's and
that's separate from things that are
more direct like like just swinging
elections to having fraudulently one
sense but secretly giving millions and
millions of dollars to one side in an
election which will then win because it
overwhelms the opposition yeah it's
interesting they had they had a thing
called the Institute for democracy or
some some sort of an organization that
had a great deal of American funding to
to
now that democracy and influence
elections and yet if they were to say
that there are people are going to
influence elections here in the United
States does that some sort of a
horrendous something that cannot be
allowed to have the Chinese charged that
the Chinese are putting money into the
into the campaign financing you're
referring to United States but the the
cysts they had this organization and or
you're not an endowment for democracy
yeah and it's just digging is that's the
most miss named organization other than
the CIA itself that's something you
would call people's attention ality OSHA
but you but one of the problems is
because a level of hypocrisy it's so
high that you can you know you can cut
it with a shovel and you would think
people understand but the American
public to a large extent have become
inured to a lot of this over the years
because it's just a mean the thing about
in the elections people think it is
absolutely horrible that say the Chinese
would donate some money to some
congressman's campaign and they do but
the US has been donating money donating
being a loose word to campaigns for 50
years all over the world in some cases
huge amount of me we're talking you know
tens of millions of dollars hundreds of
millions of dollars and in some cases of
recent years not even secretly and yet
the government can take the position
that it's not wrong for the National
Endowment for democracy to pump you know
millions of dollars into elections in
Russia or Ukraine or whatever but it
would be the greatest sin in the world
if some chinese businessman gave money
to a candidate is it sort of hubris or
arrogance on our part that we think that
we have the the right institutions that
are to be put upon I don't know some
people say Pax Romana or you know
America that we have a pox Americana
that we have the institutions that are
going to influence the whole world and
the sooner people can become aware of
those structural adjustment other kinds
of things that we can oh yeah I mean
let's let them just get with it and they
ought to get with it and we're going to
do that rather than let's go spinning
let's hope that someday it is referred
to as hubris yeah right it's accepted as
as
the god-given right of the American
government to to tell everybody else in
the world what's best for them the every
throw some it's become accepted I mean
we this country goes crazy if some other
country type tries to tell us what we
should do or what position we should
take on some issue they've got no right
to injure yet right we not only do we
tell other countries how they should
handle their internal affairs we tell it
if they don't do it we're going to bomb
the bejesus out of them occasionally do
that and we also can intimidate them
with the Bretton Woods organizations
which are in Washington interesting not
even in New York but there in new york
and and they're supposed to be an
international agency but it's really a
projection of hilarity not us can't
control an international agency they
don't generally belong to it or else
they quit quit UNESCO when they couldn't
control that and then came back when
they could control it and it's just the
the the US government gives lip service
to international law at best I mean we
just simply do not accept anything that
can tell the United States what to do
because of this notion that we have the
god-given right to tell our wheels in
the world what that's not just an
outgrowth of realpolitik into thinking
that sovereignty resides at the national
level and there's no more in Omaha and
Morgenthau you say there's no morality
and international relations that kind of
thing are we getting beyond that to
where some of the international law in
Criminal Court just trying to know about
the night begun to be appropriate to a
world is becoming globalized and so
forth that's one key more about
hypocrisy okay because we accepted
international participation in the
nuremberg trial that's right and gave
lip service to to internationally United
action but that was only because we knew
that was going to come out the way we
want it to be and whenever we do know
it's going to come out the way we want
it to be then we say we support that
type of international accidentally is
that gonna be hired excuse me let me
just say that yeah after Nuremberg yeah
within a matter of weeks we were hiring
a number of the war criminals the world
class war criminals who were not
executed and they came to work for the
u.s. government for the CIA for the us
information agency and other
the Atomic Energy Commission and others
yeah yeah so we were in that kind of way
it's not it's not a it's not an
outgrowth of the you know they may be
may be fair to go back I mean because we
do have this idea of realpolitik we do
have a world that's becoming more and
more globalized there are some companies
that will be able to operate in a global
pattern where they will in a certain
sense bypass as they can sovereign
government entities and say fourth you
will do what we tell you and it's it's
coming to be where the privatization and
the public in the private sector is
becoming more and more important but I
want to get back up the CIA as an agency
for gathering intelligence and working
in international three throughout of the
OSS and the Second World War the
intelligence activities Donovan and
those kind of people was there I knew
people that were serving in the OSS
probably and well in terms of fighting
the Nazi and that sort of thing and then
it somehow got off track or did it grow
out of that or and does the CIA an
agency entity like the CIA exists with
all sovereign countries are we just
let's say in a certain sense condemning
the United States for what is it
actually an international practice and
all come with the Mossad we have other
kinds of agencies around the world that
have this they had the capability in the
Soviet Union and that's anything or not
I'm what if you could put it in a
perspective well OSS of course the
Office of Strategic Services was in its
time really a small-time organization it
was it was a few hundred men mostly some
women very few and their job was as they
did it was harassment was covert
activities paramilitary activities but
in my view in the view of a number of
scholars have written on OSS it was
quite ineffectual not only against the
Germans but also in in in in Asia in the
arena against the Japanese and in
Manchuria I I think that many of the
people who joined the CIA in 1947 two
years after the OSS was disbanded
where shall we say somewhat idealistic
but that idealism that they had during
OSS days very very quickly dissipated
and they became very hard-nosed very
believers in America rules the world how
did it get to be from where it was a
noble agency to where it became one that
was doing things that could be seen in a
certain interpretation is ignoble I
don't think whatever inaudible agency
they may have any local in the beginning
I had to have some noble intentions but
what happened was almost from the very
beginning from talking to OSS and known
otherwise I talked about from the
beginning the wealthy the OSS mission
was to fight the Nazis which was a noble
enough mission under the circumstances
of World War two nobody there wasn't any
sort of pro-nazi side having an argument
about this problem is that even before
the last days of World War two it the
mission of the US intelligence agencies
to be was already clearly to fight
communism rather than the Nazis and this
decision was made even before the world
war two was over right but it was more
than that because what it really was was
the global competition and once you set
up a secret agency which is at the
bidding of the president the president
very quickly discovers that he has this
like amazing toy yes in his hands at
Toys Toys a bad word because they kill
as I said millions and millions of
people but million all of a sudden oh
sure the the in Indonesia and the
revolution Indonesia was the CIA played
a major role and fomenting mwah millions
of people were were killed there have
been a few millions is not is not an
overstate that swear I'm saying that
there's no question about that but it's
more than just the the casualties in the
over at wars there's generally because
the mission is to support the American
commercial apparatus and multinational
corporations and so on you will end up
having the CIA as an instrument keeping
oligopolies and power in almost every
country where they operate and what that
will generally mean is that the majority
of the people sometimes the vast
majority of people in those countries
live in misery so that the companies and
organizations that support the
government that we keep in power can do
well so while the CIA's mission in that
country might not be to make the lives
of ninety percent of the people
miserable what they do will have the
effect of making the lives of ninety
percent of the people and in the thing
that needs to be very clear here is that
the CIA around the world since nineteen
since the early 50s has created in
country after country after country and
we can list them if you want the
agencies of repression in in in Iran in
Indonesia in the Philippines in taiwan
in Malaysia in Guatemala in Brazil I
mean the list is endless and I think
people should understand that in order
to enforce the system that the CIA and
the and the US government seeks to
impose they need to have an apparatus on
the ground up and running which is just
as ruthless as it can be let me just say
that the the one of the founding
documents of the CIA in 1947 actually
used the word that we need to be
ruthless that was in fighting what they
referred to as fighting communists in
the name of anti-communism so much was
done right right right it has been and
that's been that's been the situation I
I asked before the idea that the CIA is
something relating to American interest
in America and the United States strides
the world with big league boots these
days and they're very super power
remaining superpower fall of the Soviet
Union but is the CIA or something
comparable to the CIA characteristic of
to the degree they can muster it is
characteristic of all the governments of
the world or is there something
clearly nefarious that's the right term
without the operations of the of our CIA
as compared to other intelligence
agencies around the world or where does
it fit in is there an international
intelligence community and how do they
fit together well how does it end do you
to look at some of the others other than
the CIA intervention over oh yeah I mean
virtually every country has an
intelligence division of some sort right
but in smaller less powerful countries
it's normally limited to more
traditional notions of gathering
intelligence or trying to keep tabs on
things or keep its government informed
to or occasionally it will be linked to
domestic repression of a sort I mean
some of these intelligence agencies have
very little to do with international
affairs but are mostly there is some
branch of their government to deal with
the opposition but in order to interfere
in the affairs of other countries to the
level of which the CIA does you have to
be a major power and the fact is that
all the major powers have these
institutions and all of them doing to
interfere in each other's affairs and
and and the affairs of the hapless
little countries that get interviewed
with by everybody but there's a
qualitative difference we we think
between the the way in which the CIA did
this end the way in which almost all the
other major intelligence agencies even
including the KGB did this the KGB was
never responsible for the deaths of
millions upon millions of people in
foreign countries the way the the United
States was in places like Indonesia they
have spies all over the place and
they're always I mean every country
wants the policies of other countries to
be favorable to it the United States
would like France or Britain or Germany
or would like their foreign policy to be
what we want it to be and every country
wants that about everybody else but what
the u.s. does in order to manipulate
those policies in other countries is
like Liu said is much more ruthless than
than anybody else in current times or
modern times and there have been I mean
the the Soviets the French the German
the the British that all had done some
ruthless ruthless things in their time
but nobody made such a steady and and
hugely financed policy of massive
interventionist s than us did it's
changing now because they're using
public organizations and quasi public
organizations and and multinational
corporations in ways that they never did
openly before in the old days the
multinational corporations would be
provide cover for the CIA to do some of
its things now they they do it now then
the multinational corporations will do
it they'll have a branch they will do
well because it's much more easy to
interfere in other cut their there are
foundations which will probably not
remain nameless but there are
foundations group that give millions of
dollars to a political party in an
upcoming election in some country in
Eastern Europe now in the old days the
CIA had to do that secretly you how to
set up little organizations in
Liechtenstein and here and there and
funnel your money to them so they could
get it and people would sneak across the
border and give the money to the
opposition now you don't have to do that
now some American Foundation will
publicly open offices in the capital of
this little country and give boodles of
money to the people at the US government
and coincidentally this foundation want
to win and and there and some of them
are related to to multinational
corporations some are not some are there
are certainly you can see among the
major multinationals which countries
would have an obvious interest in this
country being pro this or anti that the
country where you do a lot of your
manufacturing you want to have very weak
labor laws but you'd be perfectly happy
if the company where your competitors
basis very tough labor laws and you can
try and manipulate yeah yeah so the
whole thing is because what used to be
cold I wonder maybe it's pretty soon
there won't be any more covert actions
that will all be overt actions that will
be taking place on a world international
scale as things begin to globalize and
things take place in the open as it were
that would have been horrendously
illegal
or immoral or unethical in the in the
context of we saw things in the past but
it's now becoming towards being openly
done on a world scale is it a case the
United States is particularly comes into
your focus CIA and that sort of thing
because we are particularly successful
at a game that all the world is trying
to pay so is it a certain sense trying
to take a potshot on your parts at comp
something comparable to Microsoft is
very very successful in the software
industry United States is very
successful to be very successful you you
just don't want to you know you want to
you don't want to allow the success that
they've been able to generate another
success that's what politics and
geopolitics is all about and America's
doing real well you're being a devil's
advocate I know that but I just thought
I'd throw it out this success their
success stories are far outweighed and
not numbered by their failures but their
successes are measured by them by the
CIA in term in body count like the
Pentagon and the numbers of people that
are killed the numbers are elections
that they can they can manipulate the
numbers of newspapers that they can
control and that's to me the most
devastating statistic of all that is the
human cost of their operations needless
to say their failures as they call them
and they rarely talk about their
failures but the public knows more and
more what they are the failure for
example to to predict even to know about
the the fall of the Soviet Union would
never bathe there's an amazing they've
got the biggest story that was coming is
just eccentric anomaly makes you wonder
and there are numerous other failures
you could point to the Shah of Iran they
defended him to the last week of his
rule there and suddenly he be they were
calling him a megalomaniac he will
you're you and I'm sure you're your
viewers remember Jeanne Kirkpatrick who
wrote a book saying that Anastasio
Somoza in Nicaragua was a dictator but
he was our dictator he was our friend
and
APPA doc Duvalier was the closest friend
we had in for many many years and baby
doc then in Haiti and Suharto until last
month in Indonesia and you could go down
the list you know when for the years
that they they held power with the iron
grip underwritten by and supported
actively by the u.s. in particular the
CIA but also the State Department and
other arms of the government they were
the best thing since sliced bread as far
as the government the US government
perceived it and then suddenly when they
can't hold power anymore when the public
in the mess of the of the public in
those countries in country after country
cannot take it anymore and rises up and
just throws them out suddenly now now we
call them dictator amazing yeah yeah
yeah that does that fortunately American
people you know have very very short
political memories for things like this
and they did not only do they not hold
the government to account for these
quick flip flops they don't even hold
the media to a counter because if you
and the problem is it's a lot of hard
work to do it but even if you take the
case of Suharto if you looked on the
front pages of New York Times of the
Washington Post for 30 years year after
year after year they were talk about
President Suharto this president say the
word dictator would never ever appear
right two months before he's going to
fall the New York Times will start
saying you know presidents who hard to
who some people refer to as a dictator
but another week or two later they're
going to say presidents who heart of the
apparent dictator of a known two weeks
after that they're going to say dictator
suharto and then the next day he's gone
and the time to say see we we told you
all along I was at the table for 29 and
three-quarter years they talked about
him like he was a great guy right and
nobody remembers and nobody says you
know holds them and they and that
happens time after time after time and
sometimes it's very varied we learned
from some discussions and debates with
people in major newspapers and
particularly the times that they have
the establishment press has formulae
acuestas in the modern age of computer
which is so much easier than the old
blue
pencil day a reporter cannot get away
with I mean for example for ten years at
least long after the the overthrow of
ind and even to the point where where
Pinochet's power was diminishing the New
York Times always referred to the
Marxist salvador allende trippingly and
you can if if a reporter had a sentence
which said salvador allende the computer
through the Marxist in front of Salvador
Allende because that was and this is not
a joke this was I mean I know it sounds
funny I know it does does about anything
is when you look at it and you see
experts that 850 times out of 850 it
said the Marxist Salvadoran d it's not
it's not coincidence right it always
said for example and to this day I think
still does they may have changed it a
little bit but at least as of a few
years ago they always refer to the past
history as the I end a regime and they
always referred to the to the Pinochet
government yeah and if you said the I
end a government the computer took out
the word government and threw in the
word regime because they had to set now
that the are the ironic thing is that I
end I was elected and Pinochet wasn't
yeah and yet because regime in this
country in American English has a bad
connotation to it the decision was made
to refer to a yen days government as a
regime and refer to Pinochet's as a
government and that's and you just
couldn't do it otherwise because your
copy had to go through the computer
before it got typesetting those words
with and then that's becoming even more
so now become more and more into the
info yeah people don't realize the
extent to which the little words that
are in the news and the way whether it's
dan Rather reading off a script or
something on the front page of the times
or whatever it is and CNN and public
radio and television are not immune to
this either it creeps in the words are
very very important in building internal
almost subconscious notions of things I
mean if you hear of a thing of a
government referred to as a regime yeah
yeah I never referred to as anything
else but a regime
you begin to think it probably took
power in some bloody coup and it's a
repressive Nazi whatever and you never
realize that the only reason you think
that is because they decided to use the
whole it there yeah right right right I
don't remember you can minimize a group
or a people or a country or nation was
an ass right yeah well so called us yes
I mean yes time off but the other times
used to refer to the so-called
non-aligned movement uh-huh which was
sort of bizarre this was an
international organization its name was
the non alike they never said the
so-called north atlantic treaty they
said the so-called united nations right
i said the so-called non-aligned
movement even though that was its
official name because so call so that
makes it you know little less palatable
well this is all part in that thing they
call spin or they put an interpretation
on it or dissimulation or disinformation
is now openly that way and that's so
much a part of the of the the in the
media now that's why we've talked to
your return with covert action but I'll
covert action but I mean also this idea
the Institute for me the analysis that's
very important to try and understand the
media because it is influencing
consciousness and influencing and
allowing for people to internalize
certain kinds of values and has a
political connotation the media that in
power that it has not had historically
and to analyze that him to understand it
is really of the essence in terms of
trying to understand published policy
don't you don't you think they're as you
were just speaking but I was trying to
remember the last time i read in any
print media the word regime after
whether it was Nixon bush Reagan Clinton
I never saw that don't either so they're
they're so together you don't even see
it in the Democratic different yet there
are many people in this country who
certainly perceive successive
governments accessible administration's
as regimes in terms of how they operate
yeah I'm sure yeah yards are astonishing
I mean the thing is that the the
government directly and indirectly
through the establishment press have
been spinning the news for ever
centuries I suppose probably forever i
mean frankly I mean to a certain extent
the ancient governments tried to do the
same thing i mean you know i mean the
victors car
the the monuments and put the
inscriptions on and roll history by
exactly yes I mean so it wouldn't you
know it would say the who was who was
great but it's become so pervasive now
that the media an awful lot of it has
become self propelled yes and through
self-censorship more than anything else
I mean the CIA doesn't need although
they have them all over the it doesn't
need an actual employed case officer
agent inside the newsroom of every major
publication around the world now mind
you it still has them in a lot of places
but it doesn't need it as much now
because if it can manipulate the
government thinking and that's relation
to the corporate thinking the publishers
of the establishment press are going to
say what they want them to say now they
have the fall back they've got those
computers that will take out the bad
words but they almost don't have to you
the communities don't have to do that
very much what I mean it's not I mean
the other thing is that it shouldn't be
that surprising people in this country
will use an expression like the
establishment press right the
establishment media without stopping to
think what that means I mean if they
said the communist press they know that
means the press that takes the view of
the Communist Party it has said that the
Social Democrat press or the Christian
Democrats and people in Europe no yeah
because in Europe they're much more
honest about it you'll go to a new stay
in there's six papers everybody knows
that's the Communist paper that's the
Christian Democrat paper that's the
Social Democrat paper that's the the
whatever paper and you know that right
but in this country you think they're
all very objective except for the fact
that there's the establishment press
which means they're the paper that
represent and promote and push and
insist on the view of the establishment
all right then what if they say that the
establishment is a very big umbrella
very big tent and there's all kinds of
thought and belief in somewhat it fits
under this big umbrella of democracy and
so forth and that we're there's room for
all sanity runs the gamut from A to B
well I know you know when they I say
with a mixin they'll get rid of Nixon
but it was the establishment that got
rid of neck sonata you know there's an
institution right now run out of the
u.s. animation agency
it's a sort of a newfangled version of
what Bill is talking about and it's
called world net where they have
completely I think stage-managed press
conference as they call and press
conferences where Madeleine Albright for
example and other officials will sit in
a studio and she will take questions
from journalists in in particular
countries okay hmm and they're all it's
it's real it's life like it happens live
the problem is that the people who were
allowed to ask those questions are
hand-picked their people and anyone who
they know is going to ask the wrong
question and they have to submit
questions in writing before they come in
to ask them the whole thing is
completely fraudulent and yet this is
how part of the whole media manipulation
that we we conduct it's only a small
part but it's pretty late and done we
want to talk about media analysis would
they say that for a report or something
that the thing that they're going to
filter out reporters who come in who
simply are not informed they do not
understand the nuances of the language
they do not understand the nuances the
policy not well enough informed they're
likely to ask just well nieve questions
they just don't understand the realities
and they want people who really do
understand so that it won't lose time
with a lot of you know the riffraff
asking naive questions from alternative
views rather than it being some sort of
a thing that's going to seriously
question the way the system works they
just don't want people who aren't
informed so they want those qualified
people to be having internalized and
actually learned the realities of by the
way in which this world works so that we
can get real news reporting out there
and they waste our time with you know
well that's what they'll say I mean now
that you've said it they'll probably
take that down and use it next time but
we know perfectly well that what they do
is exclude people who are going to ask
questions they don't want to be asked
there's nothing to do with how in fact
most of the people there excluding are
probably considerably more well informed
than the people they include people they
include have simply been able to write I
mean does you don't have to know that
much to know what kind of a question the
official would like to get is but you do
have to know something to know what kind
of a question the official would not
like to get it and the people in the
media will will in very often it might
be in a certain sense of you were sit
down have dinner some they were
have just self censored in a certain
sense or internalize those values in
their psychological makeup they're not
doing it perhaps in a way that is
nefarious in their own or you know some
sort of a thing like they just
internalize those values and then they
begin to be recognized most of them get
rewards most of these major people are
not part of some monstrous over
conspiracy when they sit down and say
well we're not going to talk about that
strike in that city because this big
corporation doesn't really want right
that to be talked about they sort of
know in general that you know it is not
the the working people of the country
that own their corporation is there are
bosses and the guy in on the big anyway
it is yeah I mean sometimes it's more
direct yes in this country in particular
what's happening all around the world
almost all major media organizations are
no longer independent companies they are
now small parts of giant conglomerates
whose major businesses no longer than
news every major Network and most major
newspapers are owned by companies
entertainment whose major industry is
not that well know General Electric is
not you know they they make you know but
but the TV station is a small part of it
they even the new york times company has
more other businesses than the newspaper
really by far yeah they're one the
biggest paper manufacturing companies
the world and wood pulp and that kind of
the times itself is a small part of it
every single major media operation is
now being run by people who were
businessmen with stockholders in the
bottom line and not not a company whose
main business is his news and though
they will end up having you know people
working for them who understand that
they will also have people working for
them who realize that you do not bite
the hand that feeds you none of them may
these major corporations ever unless it
happens by accident and then people with
the axe will fall never run stories
exposing some other branch of that
multinational much less exposing the
media themselves they you you cast a
blight upon the the media analysis the
analysis of the media and their
institutions that do that not enough
Jeff Cohen does would fare and some
other people too
and they try and look at that sort of
thing but they do and you have these
people these large corporate been bagged
Dickian has perhaps better than anyone
has a good you know has documented the
degree to which the consolidation down
into a few media companies controlling
eighty-five percent of what goes before
the eyeballs and years of the people of
this country's by fewer smaller
companies and you've got so many people
within those companies that are not even
don't even have the patina of a
journalistic objectivity or something
like Admiral or something like that but
there's just simply businessmen making
business decisions and then at the same
time you have an invisible hand of
business stock values is going to best
let the world run on automatic pilot or
something I don't know they actually
believe that then you have the example
and I'm trying to remember his name Pete
Williams who was the Pentagon spokesman
who crosses the street one day he's at
the Pentagon his last day next day he's
at at was at NBC where he's now a
correspondent yeah all right this is
really dirty stuff so you so you have a
combination of both the government and
the and the and the press the press had
been in one thing I don't know minkin
whoever said it that you're to afflict
the comfortable and bring comfort to the
afflicted that kind of a journalistic
kind of charge is being lost by the
media do you think the media you winter
media analysis what do you see about me
we talking us and we do want to touch we
want to take a minute or two to look at
television media and also the internet
that's emerging is a miraculous new kind
of development is coming on the scene
but we do we are here after all in
public access cable television which in
a certain sense is supposedly and
theoretically in a sense divorced from
the commoditization process of
information and is set aside for the
folks in a way and whether we look at
what's important in versus you were the
network's on the the okay but anyway you
do see this as a problem in terms of the
voices of alternative voices being able
to find a way into the public
consciousness oh absolutely absolutely
it's gotten to be so expensive a
business too
you know putting inside the internet for
a moment but now reach the kinds of
audiences unless you get back Reese we
will yeah that the alternative media
can't really compete on the same level
with the networks and the major national
and local newspapers at all it's it's
almost insurmountable it's not
insurmountable when the problem really
is glaring it's Morse amount above when
you're dealing with with national and
local issues and international issues
because international issues it's very
hard to convince people what's really
happening in some country 10,000 miles
away if the networks in the papers are
saying something's the country it's much
harder for the establishment to fool
people about what's happening on Main
Street because there's a limit to how
much you can lie in the newspaper that's
something that happened in the middle of
town and everybody saw it and said no
that's not true that's not what happened
you can describe a demonstration in
Istanbul and you can say whatever you
want nobody who reads the paper here is
going to know whether you're telling the
truth or not though they'll many will
unfortunately assume you are but you
couldn't really describe a major thing
happening in the middle of New York City
or Washington too inaccurate what do
people having some smart couldn't say a
handful of people came to protest the
Vietnam War when we can tell a million
people Yeah right so they can do better
on fooling people on foreign policy than
on domestic but I it's I don't know what
the answer other than you know
encouraging the alternate media
encouraging things like public access
and alternative magazines and so on like
in the Institute for media analysis I
mean that's a very important yes we
tried all the way but you know again we
don't purport to be able to even when we
publish books and monographs and
pamphlets and stuff there's no way we
can compete with the establishment
publication Ventura you do what you can
and you're able in with others you know
put a spotlight on that everyone who can
spot like some of these other egregious
things has sent this project censorship
that they do it's not so Allah we nail
up yeah right all right that's good
anything but I'm wondering that big tent
that idea we have a big tent we're under
the word
rubric establishment that it can hold a
wide variety of thought in a wide
variety of philosophy in fact some
people think there's very not a dime's
difference between the Republic and the
Democrats now and the that kind of thing
and so forth but it is it possible
within that large tent that perhaps they
will at a certain point come to a with
the downsizing with the globalization
with the negative effects that so many
people are feeling some people feel
there's a certain degree despite the
Wall Street setting records and the
employment levels and so forth being
high and the economy is being well entry
but there are a lot of people who have
at a certain sense a sense of there's
expert systems other kinds of things
perhaps displacement of labor problems
that there's a level of angst it's
abroad in the society and that if within
that broad tent someone could find a
philosophy let's say a political
philosophy which would bring up let's
just say a human face to capitalism or
something of that sort that would be
able to bring an alternative system that
the competitive forces within this
establishment would be able to find
yourself if they could but find a
reasonable alternative voice to the way
things are going to be operated
domestically and internationally but
they haven't yet quite found that voice
within the tent which we call the
establishment if they did there could be
competitive forces who would go with
that politically or not or do you think
that that's a dead issue that we cannot
find answers within the broad array of
the established notions of accepted
wisdom and that sort of i don't think
the tent is they won't allow people in
the tent who either people or ideas into
the tent which are different than the
status quo what is it i don't think i
don't think most of us are in that tent
what to talk about all right what is it
when we talk about the establishment of
the alternative what is the defining
characteristic of the alternative and
what is the institution or the basic
institution that is to be safeguarded
under the rubric establishment and what
is the holy grail that is so assiduously
being protected oh the vast majority of
the wealth of the nation I mean it's
very very snore a very very small
percentage of the people it's country on
a very very large percent of everything
oh yes and they wanted to pretend
virtually oh look at the media's
reportage on Bill Gates for the
our year I'm just as one example on
Microsoft and now of course the Justice
Department is pursuing legal avenues
against Microsoft the fact is until
Forbes magazine of all people comes out
with their list their annual list and
this week showing that Bill Gates income
in 1997 is 51 billion dollars its tone
even seen he's made 15 billion dollars
more this year than last year yeah the
point is the media the mainstream media
doesn't touch the obscenity of a Bill
Gates having that kind of money to say
nothing of the fact that he doesn't so
this would be this would be the cynic
wanna know something of trying to find
some sort of thing is that is the if you
know there's lots of different kinds of
things you could find and so forth you
know but there would be that the
concentration of the ownership of the
melee is the question that is to be
suppose they were to come up with some
sort of assistance democratize that well
see the prophecies gitam Utley
democratize the ownership of the
technological aspects or the the capital
assets listen they really didn't able
account i wouldn't go use the expression
before Harold about capitalism of the
human face yeah you use the Apostle
another system is it is it it I would
actually say first of all capitalism
with the human face is not another
system capitalism capitalism whatever
mask you put on it and I think it's
probably inherent in that system that
you can't have the kind of economic
democracy that we're talking about
because I mean I don't want to get into
I mean I'm not an economist and I don't
know all the terminology right but
basically if people are making a profit
of the labors of others the others are
losing something that those people are
making they're not sharing it the boys
and the worker don't sit down and share
right the profit I don't know this is
you know this it's maybe you can take
tens or hundreds or thousands of years
to evolve something remotely idyllic if
we haven't blown the world to bits
before that happens but in the short
term at least the difficulty
is fighting these myths that democratic
capitalism is the system we have in this
country is is like wonderful for
everybody don't not want to know but you
can you can bring up to sir we don't
have that story in itself could be we
don't have democratic capitalism we have
Democrat we have economic plutocracy
this is a plutocratic system we live in
oh sure most people are beholding the
economic interest in order to keep them
in line within a system it is not but
I'm saying they call it about saying you
kids I'm not sure that democracy and in
the very full sense that you mean it and
capitalism are our compact consistent or
compatible there are certain inherently
undemocratic things in capitalism which
is that somebody's gonna be making money
and somebody's me losing it well alright
maybe maybe I don't know maybe there
were no strange and wonders time he says
you can have a country we're getting
creating rich people did not require
creating poor people right that would be
terrific but I haven't seen that yet
well nobody ever no wonder I don't know
I mean it's interesting on me because
you assume zero-sum and your analysis
there that for one to win another has to
lose Bucky fuller used to go around and
now you got strange people going around
Bucky fuller used to say that through
the technological capability extension
of our capability we were growing
through time two hundred thousand we
were not only we lost rely equally but
it's getting worse you have no but he
well in the end the surface but at
another level he said that the
technological capability was creating an
abstract capability where we had the
ability which we hadn't had historically
that we cross the line from where there
were more in our abstract capability
more haves and have-nots in terms of our
technologically augmented capability of
providing life support he said we cross
that line 1970 well George guilty you
know there are but nobody could be no
but historically the abstract capability
was not there we could have said in
grand century everybody's right you know
we can have what it was everyone yeah if
there wasn't nothing wrong but not to
have some hungry people you there was
enough food but the problem is that I
agree completely at a certain level yes
but there's a bill Tory no no but the
problem is the line is cursing it's not
brought up what problem is there's no
way you can get the food to the person
who's hungry without having to take some
food away from the person who's got too
much food and wasted no
throws it away yeah I mean yeah well I
agree the biggest all right of this
stuff up there oughtn't to be any
starvation on earth but neither does it
have image to feed everybody but i would
i would submit that it might be that
we've come at a time where you know and
then with the microprocessor in the end
moore's law and they going and even
George guilt or right when you're like
George Gilder is going around saying
scarcity is an absurdity we don't have a
scarcity we only have an inefficient in
a capable distribution system of this
capitalistic so that's an apology for
capital trying to not efficient it's
very efficient what the capitalism with
the human face as possible no I thought
it's all right it's a contradiction an
oxymoron oxymoron perhaps right hey
Barry part is that while everything
you're saying about the potential yes
they're the fact that there is more than
enough food to feed everybody food and
all the resources I know but a they're
not giving it away to the people that
needed and be the gap is getting worse i
mean the scariest thing about this
country and most of the Western
countries i think but certainly this
country is that the gap between Richard
and poor is increased yeah on the
surface decreasing right the gap between
blacks and whites in terms of economics
is increasing not decreasing yeah all
this is scary the the gap between the
life expectancy of white people and
black people is increasing between rich
people in portrait is in recess right i
mean the fact of the matter is that
despite the the decades and decades if
not hundreds it is a myth about the
american middle class and we're all
pretty much the same i mean a poor
person on welfare and some in the city
is not the same as Bill Gates no it's
not it just not too so it's not it's not
in America Bill Gates's people are gonna
live longer and eat more well and have
everything and the other people are
dying younger and and starving and it's
if that were decrease yeah then you
could you could again ill perhaps so
perhaps I think there still may be some
room forever for optimism because if it
was as you were in a trend we were going
to go into the future like that it
really would be a disastrous scenario
that we'd have for the human society we
couldn't get in to join entropy so there
isn't in evolution there's punctuated
equilibrium where there's a tremendous
buildup of forces of trends buildup of
forces of an inappropriate utilization
of what we're capable of doing and that
story will be told at some point and
maybe there will be
a liberation of the human condition it
may and if there is there must be some
place where that story can be told
within the media and it's important that
there be some alternative capability or
places public access one public access
here that's part of Time Warner this is
but there's a certain kind of
organizational structure as part of Time
Warner this is time LS this is time
warner your are the establishment media
time or cut there is a division between
public access which is non kamata sized
non kamata size thing and it exists
around the country and it's important
and i just wondered if maybe you think
that this non kamata size use of
television which is television is the
leading aspect of consciousness now and
the non kamata size use of the internet
which we see is coming like the calorie
over the hill there might not be some
importance to be placed upon those two
instances of communication in terms of
maintaining of milieu where some
alternative vision might be able to find
its way in terms of this larger systems
understanding of how the earth might be
transformed we got about one minute do
you see a connection between rising that
ethnic access television and the
Democratic aspects and they're going to
start streaming on to the internet we've
got about two or three-year window where
the television the leading edge your
television and an alternative mode will
be public access there should be more
attention given to safeguarding public
access Oh app identity for you have it a
statement after the fight they stay on
because the fact is that if shows like
yours and public access become a real
threat to this establishment oligopoly
that we're talking about they will try
to get rid of the public access and
everything related to it very quickly
and if you and your supporters and that
whole concept are strong enough to beat
back that move then that's a major
victory because the minute you begin to
look dangerous they're certainly going
to try to get rid of unless you have an
alternative which is within the big tent
that makes it possible so this happy
scenario where we're going to allow
ourselves to do what we're capable of
doing is able to present itself on a
politically realistic tableau in the in
the in the system so you have to have a
system where the system could be made
aware of what is capable of doing which
it doesn't do within
normal context I know maybe that's the
challenge of what you're both your
journal and your I think the best tool
that people would have is to be able to
recognize to recognize disinformation in
the within that big tent that they see
and they see on television or in their
in their newspapers and we see it every
day okay well listen we're right out of
time Thank You Lewis wolf covert action
quarterly and I'm a bill bill for shab
thank you very much for coming your era
we invite you to tune in again we'll
come back next week in conversations
that's it for now until next week thanks
again very much for coming in till NEX
thank you